Audi, which uses voice recognition for "points of interest" and full street addresses, is working on voice-enabled features that will allow drivers to send or receive text messages or use social networks in the car "without having to handle a device," says Anupam Malhotra, Audi of America's manager of connected cars.

Focus group research by the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers late last year found that 90% of drivers with smartphones keep them in their hand, lap, cup holder or on the passenger seat."So, clearly, having access is really important to them," says Alliance spokesman Wade Newton.

Nearly three quarters of respondents also said the government shouldn't ban the use of hands-free, voice activated phone systems. If the government did ban these systems, almost half of those with smartphones said they'd use their phone or GPS device instead.

"Voice operation can allow them to do it in a way that's safer than it would be to have them behind the wheel fumbling around with something they bought at an electronics store; and was never even designed to be used in a car," Newton says.

Baloga agrees: "Lack of cup holders doesn't separate drivers from their coffee. Expecting all drivers to endure smartphone withdrawal is unrealistic."

But some safety advocates warn that the new technology may not solve the problem.

The safety benefits — or detriments — of these technologies are still largely unknown, says David Strayer, a University of Utah psychology professor who has studied in-car technology and distraction for about a decade. AAA and Strayer are working on new research due in June that measures how mentally distracting in-vehicle communication use is while driving.

"We've seen there is all this functionality put into vehicles, but what we don't know is if it is an activity that is or isn't safe," says Strayer. "There hasn't really been any formal analysis of the efficacy of these kinds of technologies."

Clay Skelton, inventor of a system that won't allow a car to be started unless cell phones are in a docking station, cites a study by Virginia Tech Transportation Institute researchers that concluded the riskiest behaviors with cell phones are "texting, typing, reading, dialing and reaching for a phone." Technology such as his OrigoSafe and voice to text "takes away the dangerous visual and manual" distractions, Skelton says.


