A driver operates a car by pressing on pedals to make it go and stop and by turning the steering wheel to guide where the car goes. The pedals and steering wheel work because they are part of a larger system.

Engine and Related Parts
Most cars are powered by internal-combustion engines. In such an engine a mixture of air and gasoline enters a tubelike cylinder through valves. There the mixture makes small explosions. Each explosion produces gases that expand rapidly and push against a device called a piston on one end of the cylinder. The piston goes up and down as the gases expand and contract. Rods connected to the pistons convert that movement into the power that eventually turns the wheels. Most car engines have four to eight cylinders.

The air-fuel mixture that enters the engine cannot ignite by itself. It needs an electric spark. This comes from devices called spark plugs. They get their electric current from a battery. The car’s lights, horn, turn signals, windshield wipers, starter, and instruments such as the gasoline gauge are also powered by the battery.

An exhaust system carries burned gases from the engine to the muffler. The muffler cools the gases. It also reduces their pressure. This reduces the noise coming from the tailpipe. Modern cars are also equipped with a device called a catalytic converter. The catalytic converter uses chemicals to reduce exhaust pollution.

An internal combustion engine gets very hot. Cars therefore must have a cooling system. In a liquid cooling system, coolant (water and antifreeze) flows through passages around the cylinders and carries off this heat. The hot coolant is then pumped through a radiator to cool it off. Some engines are cooled by a flow of air and have no liquid coolant.

Power Train
The engine provides power to make a car go, but something else must turn the wheels. The parts of the car that transmit, or deliver, power from the engine to the wheels are together called the power train. When a car is starting or moving uphill the engine must deliver more power than when it is cruising on level ground. The transmission uses gears to reduce or increase the speed and power of the engine. The drive shaft carries the power from the transmission to the axle, which connects the wheels.

Other Mechanical Parts
Once a car is moving it is important to be able to make it stop. When a driver presses the brake pedal, pistons force fluid through small, flexible pipes to brakes at each wheel that stop the vehicle.

The wheels of a car are part of a system called the suspension system. This consists of springs that absorb bumps and shock absorbers that cushion the spring movement. The air-filled tires of a car also cushion the ride. The tires have rough surfaces that help keep them from sliding around on slippery or loose surfaces.